# ruby-wpdb

WordPress is enormously popular; it powers some 20% of the web. Rare is
the web developer who doesn't come into contact with it, even those who
develop primarily in other languages. It's user-friendly, server
specification-friendly, and ubiquitous.

But what if you need to interact with WordPress from the outside? It
might be a cron-job, it might be a little command-line tool; you might
want to export or import some content, or you might want to clean some
things up. You don't have to do that in... *PHP*, do you?

If you'd like to do it in Ruby instead, then this library might help
with some of the boilerplate.

It's a wrapper for the WordPress database, using
[Sequel](http://sequel.rubyforge.org/), that gives you access to the
WordPress database and all its content via a nice ORM.

So, you can do simple things like get the five most recent posts:

	WPDB::Post.reverse_order(:post_date).limit(5).all

Or more complicated things, like get the value of the custom field with
the key "image", but only for the first post whose title consists solely
of letters:

	WPDB::Post.first(:post_title => /^[a-z]+$/)
		.postmeta_dataset.first(:meta_key => 'image')
		.meta_value

Of course, you're not limited to retrieving records, you can create them
too:

	post = WPDB::Post.create(:post_title => 'Test', :post_content => 'Testing, testing, 123')

And ruby-wpdb knows all about the relationship between things in
WordPress â€” so if you want to create a new user, a post by that user,
and a tag for that post, you can do so by referring to the objects alone
without needing to know or care about what the actual relationships are
from the perspective of the database:

	author = WPDB::User.create(
		:user_login => 'fred',
		:user_email => 'fred@example.com'
	)

	term = WPDB::Term.create(:name => 'Fred Stuff', :slug => 'fred-stuff')

	post = WPDB::Post.create(
		:post_title => 'Hello from Fred',
		:post_content => 'Hello, world',
		:author => author
	).add_term(term, 'tag')

## GravityForms

GravityForms is a great system for easily creating forms to capture
data. But its flexibility can make querying and exporting entries
difficult; querying even just a single form can often result in having
to write hairy SQL queries with many self-joins.

ruby-wpdb gives you an easier insight into your forms, allowing you to
treat them as though they were models of any other kind.

To make this a bit more concrete, imagine you had a contact form on your
site called "Contact Form". It has four fields: "Name", "Email",
"Message", and "Enquiry type".

ruby-wpdb allows you to do things like get the latest five entries to
have selected "quote" as their enquiry type:

	WPDB::GravityForms.ContactForm.where(:enquiry_type => 'quote').reverse_order(:date_created).limit(5).all

Or display the messages that have been sent since the start of 2013:

	WPDB::GravityForms.ContactForm.where(:date_created >= Date.new(2013, 1, 1)).each do |entry|
		puts "#{entry.enquiry_type} enquiry from #{entry.name} <#{entry.email}>\n"
		puts entry.message
		puts "---"
	end

Note that you get access to all the fields of the GravityForm as though
they were first-class members of an actual model, allowing you to use
their values when filtering and ordering.

## Usage

Datasets map exactly to database names without the prefix, and dataset
properties map exactly to column names. So, if you're familiar with
WordPress's database structure, ruby-wpdb should come fairly easy.

So if your WordPress database prefix is `wp_`, the default, then you'll
find the `wp_posts` table in the `posts` dataset, the `wp_users` table
in the `users` dataset, and so on.

Beyond that, you're limited with what you can do only by the
capabilities of Sequel; you can find out more in [their
README](http://sequel.rubyforge.org/rdoc/files/README_rdoc.html).
